Were there any doctoral students in those days, or was it all master's level, those few graduate students?
They gave one or two Ph.D.
degrees at that time, and they were so bad, I didn't want any part of them.
All right, so as you recall, some of the early key forward steps were these Welch grants and getting a little more funding and so forth.
That's right.
All right.
What were some of the accomplishments that led you to feel that progress was being made, that you all were moving forward?
Fred Jensen was the department head, and he was not, in my honest opinion, a very good chemist himself.
But I will say this for him.
He stretched what little money he had about as well as any department head in those days could.
But he had almost no funds except to support their undergraduate teaching.
And describe your duties in those first years.
What courses did you teach and what are your responsibilities?
About the first five years, I only taught freshman chemistry.
And that wasn't exactly what I would have liked, but it wasn't the worst thing either because I enjoyed classroom teaching.
I've always enjoyed that.
The problem was...
that about the second or third year I was here, I found out that I had the largest student contact hours of any person at NM, any faculty member.
I had lots of classes, freshman chemistry class, lots of sections.
And I could find little time
to get in my research laboratory and even get anything started.
Was there a normal assignment hour load in those days?
Do you remember?
Yes, there was, and I can't remember exactly what it was, but during the week, as I remember, I would meet something like 35 hours of classes.
So were you the only freshman chemistry?
No.
We had, you see, a tremendous number of entering students that needed freshman chemistry in their various studies.
Typically, they were majoring in what, those taking chemistry?
Well, we taught chemical engineers.
They all took freshman chemistry.
Biology students all took freshman chemistry.
All the science majors, physicists, all took freshman chemistry, physics majors, and then a bunch of the departments in the College of Agriculture, entomology and
Soil science and all of those people took freshman chemistry.
We had a tremendous number of students that we had to take care of.
Describe some of your learning experience as a new instructor at Texas A&M, new assistant professor.
Well, I'd never done any teaching before and I didn't quite know what I was getting into.
And I didn't realize at all that back in those days, particularly, our entering freshmen students either had never had any chemistry whatsoever or had had one of the worst kinds of experiences in high school chemistry imaginable
to the point where it would have been better had they not had any previous chemistry courses.
And they came into chemistry courses at A&M frightened to death.
And it was so bad that the first class each semester that I met a freshman section
I would give them a simple exam in simple mathematics.
Most of them couldn't handle, could not convert a fraction to a decimal or the reverse.
Had no concept of powers of 10 and things of that sort.
and could not look at a simple mathematical equation where you're multiplying, dividing various numbers.
could not look at that equation and have a system for making a reasonable guess at what the answer would be.
The quizzes that we gave in freshman chemistry always had some problems involved.
These were not terribly complicated problems, but the kids did know how to use slide rules.
And any decent problem required a fair amount of time for doing the calculations.
So what I always did was to say, you do not have to get the exact answer.
correct answer on these problems.
I want you to look at the numbers and in your head figure out a way, and I showed them how to do it, convert everything to powers of ten, all the numbers,
and how you could then multiply and divide powers of ten, and look at the first part of the powers of ten number, and if you were multiplying five by fifteen, you could do this in your head, you know, and come out with a
an answer and I, anybody that got within 10% of the right answer got full credit.
It wasn't a math course, it was a chemistry course and we were trying to teach them how you could do calculations with precision if you had the ability to do the calculations and the time to do it.
But
This was a real bummer for me because these entering kids had never been taught enough mathematics in a high school to do simple calculations.
And that's one of the first things we had to teach them.
In those early years, did you learn to identify any veteran faculty member that you sometimes turned to for advice, counsel, experience?
Over the years, even back in those early days, sure, there were people, one or two in the chemistry department, but mainly in other parts of the campus,
Wayne Hall I got to know.
I'm not sure.
Looking back, I was trying to think, how did I get to know Wayne Hall so early?
Under what conditions?
I guess he was in soil science, I believe, at that time.
and was one of the real good people over there in the School of Agriculture.
And shortly after I arrived, he was made dean of the graduate school not too long after.
I'll tell you one or two other little things that'll kind of lead up to this.
I had left Monsanto because I wanted to be a scientist and I did not have any desire to be a desk person.
It wasn't because I didn't like it, it was because I liked being in the laboratory a lot better, not more.
And I hadn't been
at A&M more than about two years, three years.
And somebody from the College of Arts and Sciences called me, and I don't remember who they were, and said, offer me a job as an associate dean.
And I couldn't believe this in the first place.
And I turned it down, graciously, I hope.
And I was criticized pretty bitterly by some of the other people around the campus who said, you turned down a job as an associate dean?
What's wrong with you?
And I said, well, what's wrong with me is I like to be a scientist.
And I enjoy that more than anything else.
I truly enjoyed being in my research laboratory.
I worked with my graduate students doing experiments alongside of them, and this was my way of training them how to carry out reactions and things like that.
I'm not sure how long I've been here, but not too long, and Dean Hall called me.
Oh, Dean Hall, first of all, put me on a committee fairly soon after I got here.
And we had become close friends and liked one another very much.
And he called me over to his office one day, and he said, we have a real problem.
The College of Agriculture has a lot of research activities going on, but the quality is very, very poor.
I want you and certain other people to form a committee to review all research proposals in the College of Agriculture.
and send me a recommendation on every one of them."
And he said, I hope we can up the quality of what they're doing over there, what they were doing at times.
They would give a student a job.
They had gotten some money,
from some fertilizer company, for instance.
And the students' research was to go out on the ag campus and lay out plots, square plots, a whole bunch of them.
And in one plot, you put so much nitrogen fertilizer and so much phosphorus and change all these up.
and you would then plant corn or some plant in there, and when everything came up, the determination, the test for determining which fertilizer combinations was best was to cut the corn off at ground level and weigh it.
No measure of whether the corn was nice and green or was yellow from chlorosis and things of that sort.
And these were things that any high school graduate or high school senior could do.
There was no skill involved.
in the poultry science department.
They were carrying out experiments over there.
They would get feed from feed companies and some money to do these experiments.
They would feed a bunch of chickens various feeds and measure
how color, how yellow the yolk of the egg was.
Now there are chemicals in the yolk that make it yellow.
That's what you should be measuring if that's your test.
But that's the kind of research that was going on.
And after the first few years at A&M, you asked me a question that can be answered like this.
I began to wonder, what in the hell are you doing here?
But I knew before I came to A&M what I was getting into.
I knew A&M was not a quality university.
But my reasoning was I thought a simple one.
I had gotten two degrees from the University of Texas, elegant teaching in the chemistry department.
Everything over at the University of Texas was quality in those days.
They were the best graduate school in the entire South in chemistry.
They got their money
from the same source that A&M got its money in the state legislature.
And somebody was asleep at the switch at A&M, was my conclusion, that they weren't getting the kind of funds they needed, and then somebody hiring the administration was asleep at the switch because they weren't going out of their way trying to hire quality faculty.
Now, when you arrived, who was the Dean of Arts and Sciences?
Delaplane.
Dr. Delaplane.
Yeah.
And then the, what today would be the Provost, the Vice President of Academic Affairs, that's before Wayne Hall was in that slot.
Who was, remember who the Vice President was?
I don't even remember that they had one, but probably they did.
Was Morgan the president yet?
Morgan was the president that was here the day I arrived.
He only lasted about two years.
What was your perception of him?
He and I became the very best of friends very quickly.
He would call me over to his office and we would talk about what A&M ought to be and what directions we should go.
And I'm sure there were other people he called in like this too, but we were
I told him frankly, A&M is one of the poorest universities that I know of.
And certainly in the state of Texas, compared to the University of Texas, there's no comparison, no comparison whatsoever.
And so he was finally fired, you know.
Now he, didn't he have some plans for how he hoped
to move A&M forward?
Absolutely, and those plans didn't meet.
And what was in those, as far as you know?
Well, it was primarily get out and find the very best faculty.
You can bring in your young people, give them the facilities to do a job, get some more money from the state legislature.
Basically, that was it.
Wasn't he also considering moving for co-education?
We did not talk about that at that time.
Didn't he make the Corps optional for a couple of years?
Somebody did.
Yes, they did, but I don't believe it was Morgan.
Morgan didn't last long.
Do you have any idea what caused him not to survive here?
I have feelings.
There were people higher in the administration, the chancellor and the board of directors, but mainly the chancellor.
That was Dr. Harrington then?
That was Dr. Harrington, good old chemistry prof originally.
But most of these people, and Harrington was one of them,
in my honest opinion.
They were too busy looking, protecting their rear, and were not willing to stick their necks out one bit.
And any
radical proposal, or what may not have been radical at all, but any proposal that was different.
The Aggies in those days, I talked one day, a good friend of mine was the head of the chemical engineering department.
And this is pretty typical of the feeling around the campus.
He said,
We only hire A&M graduates in chemistry, chemical engineering.
We know how good they are, and we don't take a chance on anybody else.
And I said, you've got to be kidding.
You can only bring in new and fresh ideas and different ideas by going outside of this school.
rule should be we don't hire any A&M graduates.
We try to get as many graduates from other colleges and universities across the country as we can and pick the best you can find.
But that was the attitude.
A&M is a good school,
and we don't want to change what we're doing.
That was the attitude.
Now, what were the notable first steps in changing all this, as far as you were aware, particularly in the chemistry area?
Nothing good happened until Earl Rudder showed up, really.
When they kicked
Morgan out.
That was my one best hope, and it went down the drain.
And I was about ready to bail out and look somewhere else.
And Earl Rudder showed up.
And were you here at that time Earl showed up?
I got here, he got here, I think January 1, 59, and I came that fall.
Well, then you recognized the rough spots that he went through.
Earl was...
was a military man, and that's the way he thought.
And he didn't know how to operate in an academic arena.
And he did some stupid things in faculty meetings, as you know.
You may have been at the faculty meeting where he told anybody there that didn't like what was here, the road went, Highway 6 ran both directions.
Get on it and leave.
Well, his basic idea was all right, but the way he did it was terrible.
And I think at that, after that particular faculty meeting, I sat down.
I don't know when, I've never known when to keep my mouth shut very well.
And so I sat down and wrote him about a one-page letter and said, President Rutter,
Some of the things that you said did not go over at all well with the faculty.
And you may be right, but you've got to be tact is something that you need to work on a little bit.
And this started out about that time, shortly after he came, and Rudder would call me over to the office when I'd write a letter to him.
He'd have his secretary call me, tell Tex to come over here and I don't talk to him.
So we'd sit across the table and talk for sometimes an hour about things in general and my aspirations and
where I thought we should go and where we weren't going and what I thought maybe some of the reasons were and I think George Christ at the same time did some of this and other people may have also.
And Rudder was an interesting fellow.
You would put an idea in his brain and he didn't act on it immediately.
sometimes six months would go by, sometimes even longer.
And then he would come up with the things you've been talking about.
And Christ once said to me, Tex, you never got any recognition for the things that you and Rudder talked about and Rudder would end up doing.
And I said, George, recognition was not what I was after.
And that really was not.
And one day I told Rudder,
And by this time, I was a full professor.
I believe I got to be a full professor in 62, or 64.
The year you and I got Distinguished Achievement Award.
Yeah.
I almost put mine on, but I still have it back there.
I told Rudder, I have the best job on the campus.
There's not another job I want."
I guess we were talking about why I turned down one or two of these job offers.
Wayne Hall offered me to make me an associate dean of the graduate school.
I said,
I don't like writing my names on documents that way and reading a lot of stuff that is not terribly interesting to me at times.
And so I said to Rudder, I'm a full professor of chemistry, I have the best job on campus.
And Rudder suddenly realized, I guess, this crazy guy isn't bucking for anybody's job.
And so we got to be very, very good friends for one other reason also.
My daughter Linda and his daughter
Getting her name.
Oldest one's Ann.
No, it wasn't Ann.
It was the younger one.
Oh.
In any event, they were in the same grades in A&M Consolidated.
They both went to Texas together.
They roomed together as roommates at Texas for a year or so.
And so Linda would go over to their
home there on the campus fairly frequently, and once in a while I would be invited to come over there and just talk, you know.
So Rudder was the
guy that really got things started, he didn't know how to do it.
You will remember that a professor, full professor in
The College of Veterinary Medicine got fired, and I can't remember that fellow's name, but the net result was we were put on the AAUP blacklist.
And they treated this guy stupidly, very stupidly.
They suddenly said, after promoting him from assistant professor to associate professor to full professor, you're no damn good.
you've got to leave.
And he wouldn't leave so
They changed the locks on some of the doors.
He couldn't get into his office and did a bunch of stuff.
In those many years of sessions with Mr. Rutter, what did you find out were his goals?
His goals were very simple, very straightforward.
He wanted to make A&M the best school in the country.
He didn't know how to do it at times.
and went at it in a pretty rough way, but he was a good Aggie and a most determined individual.
All right, now at first, I know from personal experience, he was very hesitant about co-education.
Absolutely.
Volunteer core, racial integration.
What led him to change on those, do you know?
I'm sure that other people other than myself talked about these things to him.
The Corps used to really drive me crazy.
All the kids when I came here were in the Corps and I would come into a freshman class and a kid would be asleep over there because he'd been kept up all night by some stupid thing that was going on over in the Corps.
Or at the end of each semester, two or three of my best students would come by and say, Professor Isbell, I enjoyed your class very much, but I want to tell you I'm going to transfer to UT or somewhere else next semester.
And I'd say, what's the problem?
They said, almost invariably, the core is simply keeping us from getting the kind of education.
A lot of these were pre-meds.
They were trying their best to get the best grades they could to get in med school or vet school.
And the Corps was absolutely destroying this.
And Rudder and I talked about this.
Didn't talk to him as much about it, the co-ed problem, but you know, there was a year when they declared that any
daughter of a faculty member could go to school in the summertime.
And so my daughter and, well, the other, is it Linda Rudder?
The little Rudder girl.
The two of them decided to take a course.
I've forgotten even what it was.
It was in the liberal arts area.
And I was acting head of the chemistry department at that particular time, and Linda, after the first day of class, she came to me and said, I'm dropping the course.
And I said, what's going on?
And she said, Linda Rudder, the little Rudder girl,
She's dropping two, and this professor, the first class, said, let me make one thing clear.
No woman in my class will ever receive a passing grade in this course.
And I called his department head, I don't remember the fellow, he's a young guy, I don't remember the fellow's name, I called his department head and said, you know, this, I couldn't believe happened, but I have every reason to believe it did happen.
This is not the way to run this university in my opinion.
And so the guy I guess was reprimanded pretty badly and he walked into my office the next day and wanted to fight.
And I said, I'm not interested in fighting you.
You did a stupid thing and you're paying for it.
And if you do it again,
I'll be right on your tail the same way.
So these kind of things kept coming up, and I'm sure Rudder and I talked about these things.
Rudder finally decided that the future of A&M
was the admission of women and a core that was not compulsory.
It was the only way that we could really build a school that had good quality students and whose faculty would stay there.
In your relationship with him, your discussions, did you get the impression of who he listened to most?
Did he have some administrators?
He listened to Wayne Hall a lot.
OK.
That's the name I assumed you were going to mention.
You bet.
Wayne Hall is one of the most reasonable and intelligent
faculty members of those days, and I still keep in touch with Wayne.
Among things I've learned in these interviews is that Wayne Hall is the one who thought up the precise title
that this institution now holds.
Oh, is it really?
See, our recommendation of the Aspirations Committee, I was the secretary of that committee.
Right, right.
And our recommendation was Texas State University.
I was put on a committee by Rudder, and I don't recall who the other members were, but our job was to make recommendations to him for the new name for the university.
And we kicked around everything possible and finally said the only reasonable name, if history has anything to do with it, the land grant schools, many of them are Iowa State, Penn State, things like that.
And therefore, our number one recommendation was Texas State University.
In my conversation with Dean Hall, he said that when that recommendation came, and from the aspirations, he said Mr. Rudder just could not
Except the loss of A&M.
He could not, and plenty of the old farmer students were right in the same boat with Errol Rudder.
So Hall said he came up with the A&M, no period, no spaces, and that Mr. Rudder liked that.
Yeah, that's right.
It lasted.
Do you know of any other key advisors, confidants that Mr. Rudder listened to?
I think he listened to George Christ, just on the general faculty.
What about Benson?
Oh, Fred Benson, in my opinion, was one of the top administrators in those days.
Yeah, Fred Benson ranks very, very high, in my opinion.
I always liked the man.
He's a quality individual.
Yep.
As those changes began to be made in co-education... You know how the whole co-education thing happened?
Go ahead.
Earl called the president of Purdue and said this coming summer
If you could find half a dozen black students up there to send down here, we will accept them.
We won't make any public announcement.
Nothing will happen.
They will just appear, and that will be it.
And that's what happened.
And they were on the campus.
They took courses, and suddenly A&M was integrated.
In your experience as a faculty member, were you ever aware of any racial incident, difficulty, or anything?
I can't think of any, but I'll tell you something that is related to that.
When the women and blacks were first admitted, I think it was the
first year that both women and blacks could come to A&M, we had a very nice young lady who came to, during the summertime I believe it was, and took a graduate organic chemistry course from me.
Very pretty, very nice young lady, and very, very bright.
I have always expected a good deal of my students.
I'm pretty demanding in my courses, and I have always had the philosophy in a chemistry course, it's virtually impossible to make a hundred on an examination.
I don't know whether that was good philosophy or not.
In any event, I gave three or four hour exams that summer.
And after every hour exam, she was the wife of a professor at one of the black colleges in Louisiana.
And a very nice lady.
And she would come into my office after every exam with her exam.
And I graded my exams a little uniquely, I guess.
I would grade all the students' papers on question one, and then I'd go to question two, and I'd give a number on each one of the parts of the exam, and then I'd simply total those.
And I would mark pretty clearly what I was taking off for.
And this lady was making 94s and 95s, and she would come in and try to talk me out of another point or two, and she would say, now look, I didn't maybe answer it exactly like you wanted, but I finally said to her,
I'm not quite sure why you were coming in here after each exam trying to get one or two more points when you're probably making the highest grade in the whole class on each exam.
And you know what her reason was?
She had been told by her husband and maybe others
at her school.
You will not get equal treatment at A&M.
And I said to her, when I grade a paper, I don't know who the person is until I finish the entire grading and start to record the grade.
I will not treat you any differently than I will treat any other student in class.
You get no extra,
but you are sure not going to be docked for any reason except that you don't answer the question that is the way I think it should have been answered.
That's the only reason.
She never came back.
She was a great student.
But don't you think that A&M did
accept and move forward progressively with racial integration.
They did it the best way that I can imagine.
It started out that summer when those Prairie View kids came up here, and basically we had no problems that I encountered.
I never heard of that.
All right, then on the other hand, describe the beginning of coeducation from the point of view of a chemistry faculty member.
How did women, how were they accepted?
In chemistry, no problems whatever.
But they were accepted originally as graduate students.
Were there ever any though, did the male students ever give them any trouble in the early days?
Not to my knowledge.
Was there a pioneering first great female chemistry student?
Was there somebody that kind of was a blazing star?
At the very beginning?
Well, this black student was one, no question about that.
She came when women were first admitted and blacks were first admitted, and she was a quality student.
She worked hard in the course, harder than most of the others, and she made a straight A in the course.
Now I remember one of Joe Vinson's insurance, and I remember one of his daughters
was taking chemistry and other courses over at Sam Houston and driving back and forth.
And she was not a, at first, when women for the undergraduate courses, she was not the child of a,
of a faculty member or staff member.
Right.
And that, so I heard through the grapevine, Joe Vincent threatened to file a lawsuit and that she was allowed to enroll and pretty soon others were allowed to enroll at the undergraduate level.
Do you remember?
I can remember something of that sort.
Yeah, I do.
I knew who Joe Vincent was.
I wasn't a close friend of him, but I knew he was.
Yes, that did happen, I'm sure.
On the general question of coeducation and all those other changes, what was the response in general of the faculty members that you knew to those changes?
Varied.
There were some old Aggie profs that didn't think women should be in A&M.
And they made no bones about it.
They did it in a kind of a subtle way.
but there were some, not very many in chemistry, but there were sure two or three of them, yes.
Who was in those late 50s and then the 60s, who was the key chemistry departmental student advisor?
Or was there someone?
Late 50s?
I'm thinking of John Beckham.
Well, John Beckham was the invaluable person in the chemistry department.
Describe him and his role.
John did everything in the chemistry department that needed doing if nobody else was doing it, and he did it better than anybody else.
When I was asked to be acting head of the chemistry department, I begged out of it.
I guess Dean Hubert came to my office and said,
Paul Callaway had gotten ill.
He was the head of the chemistry department.
He had diabetes and he wouldn't go to a doctor.
Now Paul Callaway was my personal friend and I was the reason that Paul Callaway was brought here.
I knew him before he came here.
And he and I had the same graduate professor at the University of Texas.
Paul was a very quiet, modest sort of fellow who had the ability to get a lot of things done without anybody really realizing what was happening.
But he had John Beckham sitting right out of his office door, and John was an invaluable.
person.
He knew all the things that you have to do on the A&M campus to get a whatever it was done.
The people that you had to contact, he and and did you ever know a fellow in our department who was head of all purchasing
Well, Pete and John Beckham basically ran the department.
And the year that I was in there, John took care of all the paperwork and things like that, and Pete Rodriguez also had been here so long he knew
all the routes to take to accomplish things that he or the chemistry department needed to accomplish.
So they were the two invaluable people over there.
And when Paul became ill, he had diabetes and he wouldn't
He didn't know it.
He wouldn't go to a doctor.
And he would not come to his office sometime until 10 o'clock and stuff like that.
And I think he was at times in this kind of cataleptic state that diabetics get in.
And word was going around the campus that Paul was...